---
title: FAQ
---

## Q: What does “segmented” mean?

A: I get asked this all the time. Most of the bowls and vessels I make are segmented, meaning, rather than cut from one
large piece of wood, mine are made from many pieces of wood. These individual segments (wedges) are then glued together
to form different diameter rings and the rings are then stacked and glued together to form a segmented turning blank,
ready to be mounted on the lathe and finished.

## Q: How long does it take to make a segmented bowl?

A: Depending on the complexity of the design and number of segments involved, these vessels can take from a couple of
days for a piece with as few 100 to 200 segments, all the way up to five or six days for a piece with 1500 segments and
more.

## Q: What are the advantages of doing segmented bowls over traditional one-piece bowls?

A: Doing segmented work is unique in that I use dimensional hardwood lumber that I buy from any number of sources, and
then immediately cut into segments, glue up, and start turning right away. In contrast to segmented turning, wet turning
is taking a downed tree (or taking down a tree!) and then chainsawing into blanks, which requires a little more muscle
and time. Solid wood from a stump is not kiln dried, therefore it is wet. Wet turning requires turning it to a rough
shape and then, if you’re lucky enough to have access to a kiln, kiln-drying it for 30 days or so and then final turning
on the lathe and finishing. If you don’t have the pleasure of having a kiln, then you need time…time for the wet
rough-turned piece to adequately dry before final turning and finishing. The old rule of thumb is 1 year of drying for
every 1 inch of bowl thickness.

## Q: What’s my favorite wood to work with?

A: That’s a tough question! I can’t pick just one wood, so I’ll pick two. I’d say my favorite two woods for turning are
domestic Walnut and Cherry. They are readily available where I live, they are soft enough yet stable enough and pretty
forgiving, and they turn very nicely on the lathe . They are both really warm-toned woods and finish beautifully. A
close second to Cherry and Walnut would be Maple.

## Q: How do I design my bowls and vessels?

A: For the last couple of years I’ve used segmenting software that helps me quickly do the design work. It’s nice
because the math is done for me. Before using the computer and software to design with, I did it the old fashioned way,
with grid paper and a ruler, and a little pie…Pi, rather, 3.14159!! To calculate each segment’s edge length, you
multiple the diameter of each ring of segments you plan to make times Pi, divided by the number of segments. For a ring
of 12 segments with a 10” diameter, the formula to determine the edge length of each of those segments would look like
this: 10 (diameter) X 3.14159 (Pi) divided by 12. That gives a fairly accurate number to take to the saw to begin
cutting segments. Time consuming? Yes. I love computers and software, so it was a no-brainer to go digital for bowl
construction.

## Q: What is the best part of segmenting?

A: No question, the best part of segmenting is the ability to use different and contrasting specie of wood and
coordinate them into a design that makes most people say “WOW, how’d you do that?!” Mixing Wenge (an almost black wood)
with Padauk (a dark reddish-orange wood) with Yellow Heart (obviously a yellow toned wood) and Maple (an off-white
color) produces a real eye-popping piece!

## Q: What finish do I use on my pieces?

A: I make two types of vessels, a decorative style and a food-safe style (salad bowls, pasta, etc.) Each type is
finished differently. For the decorative vessels, I use a shellac-based high build friction polish which produces a
beautiful, smooth sheen that compliments the natural beauty of the wood. Some pieces then get a coat of carnauba wax and
beeswax that results in a shine that is lasting and lustrous. For food-safe vessels, I use multiple coats of simple
mineral oil, which is readily available at any pharmacy and can be reapplied for the life of the bowl.

## Q: What are the use and care suggestions for decorative and food-safe vessels?

A: Decorative bowls look great as a table centerpiece, on your fireplace mantel or on a bookshelf. Decorative vessels
and bowls are suitable to hold dry foods like whole fruits, nuts, or packaged candies, etc. Food-safe bowls are suitable
for such things as salad, pasta or popcorn. Avoid wet foods. I have a great story about a friend’s salad bowl in the
Blog section. To clean your bowl, wipe out with a damp cloth and dry immediately, FOR ANY WOODEN BOWL/VESSEL, DO NOT
EVER LEAVE SUBMERGED IN WATER OR PLACE IN A DISHWASHER!!

## Q: More questions?

A: Send me a message through the [contact page](/contact) here and I’ll be glad to answer your questions.
